Ninth grade, freshman year, or grade 9 is the ninth post-kindergarten year of school education in some school systems. Ninth grade is often the first school year of high school in the United States, or the last year of middle/junior high school. Students are usually 14–15 years old. In the United States, it is often called Freshman year. In England and Wales, the equivalent educational year is Year Ten. In Scotland the equivalent educational year is Third Year or S3, as this is the third year of compulsory secondary schooling.


== Afghanistan ==
In Afghanistan, ninth grade is the first year of high school.


== Argentina ==
In Argentina, this is "Third Year" and last year of "Basic Cycle" of secondary school, and depending of the province, students are 14 or 15 years old. This is because in Argentina, there’s kindergarten, primary school, and secondary school. In some provinces of the country, primary is from “1st grade” to “7th grade” and secondary school from “1st year” to “6th year”. In other provinces, primary school is from “1st grade” to “6th grade”, and secondary school from “1st year” to “6th year” or “7th grade”, if the school has it. All technical schools have “7th grade”. So basically there are between 12 and 13 (most of schools), years of school in the Argentinian Educative System, without counting kindergarten, which can be from 3-5 or 4-5 years old.
Normal subjects for a third-year student are:
•Geography: Commonly, National Geography, as in 1st year it’s Worldwide Geography, and in 2nd year American Geography.
•History: The same that happens with Geography; National History.
•Spanish: Studying techniques, and writing of books, novels, and any other texts.
•Foreign Languages: Commonly English, but depending of the school, it may has Italian, French, German, Portuguese, a indigenous language, or etc. as well.
•Physics.
•Chemistry.
•Maths: Geometry, Algebra, Statistics, etc.
•Artistic Education: Music, Acting, Art, etc. depending of the school and the year.
•Physical Education: It’s very common that you have to choose a sport, two, or more to do along the year. The most common are: Hockey, Basketball, Athletics, Volleyball, Handball, Swimming, etc.
•Technology: Theoretical subject, but related to Electricity, Mechanics etc. if it’s a technical school.
•Ethics.
•Computation and Information Sciences.
Etc.
At a technical school, besides these subjects for 3rd year, there are other special subjects of the technical part. The most common are:
•Electricity: Circuits, motors, etc.
•Carpentry.
•Mechanics: Manufacturing of electric cars, car-pieces manufacturing, welding, etc.
•Technical Drawing: Calligraphy, plan designing, etc. (Related to Mechanics).


== Australia ==
In Australia, secondary school (sometimes referred to as high school) starts in grade 8 for South Australia and grade 7 for New South Wales, Queensland , Tasmania, Western Australia and Victoria.


== Belgium ==
In Belgium, the 9th grade is called derde middelbaar in the Dutch speaking north and 3ème secondaire in the French speaking south. In some bureaus of the country, the 9th grade can be removed from one's educator curriculum in order to put the student in an appropriate class study level.


== Canada ==
In much of Canada Grade 9 is either the final year of junior high school or the first year of senior high school. Some schools combine junior and senior years into one school. In Quebec Grade 9 is the middle year of its five-year high school program (unlike in the rest of Canada, Quebec high schools end at Grade 11), and in Yukon Grade 9 is the middle year of junior high school.


== Costa Rica ==
In Costa Rica, ninth grade is the middle of high school, (here there are five years of high school then you graduate and go to college), you get a diploma and continue studying two more years, you finish when you complete five years from 13 to 17 years old, but in ninth grade your age is 15 years old.


== Denmark ==
In Denmark, ninth grade is around the same thing as in Sweden. Afterwards, one can choose to go through tenth grade, but it is not required. The students are 15–16 years old. Ninth grade is the year of first final exams and the last year of "folkeskolen" (the first 10 years of education. Starts from 0th grade to 9th grade). After they can choose the 10th grade, or go to a brand new school of higher education for two (HF, HG) or three years (STX, HHX, HTX).
The first year of higher education is called 1.g (from 15–18 years old), the second year is 2.g (from 16-19) and the third year is 3.g (from 17-20). The age depends on when you started 0th grade and if you took a 10th grade. When you finish 3.g, you get a white hat (studenterhue), with either a blue or a red ribbon around it. The colour of the ribbon depends of the school (HG, HF, HTX, HHX = blue; STX = red). An education at STX involves all the lessons you can have in Denmark, while HHX and HTX is more the lessons you want yourself and you mix it yourself. HF and HG is usual an easier education than STX, HHX and HTX.
After those two or three years, you can go to a university/college to get an even higher education (usually at the years of 19/20 until you finish. Depends on what you're studying). In STX you learn Danish, French/Spanish/German (at least one these), English, math, physics, chemistry, biology, health, Latin, EP, nature geography, GLU (general language understanding), art/drama/media course/music (at least one of these as artistic lessons), history, psychology/philosophy (at least one of these), classical studies, and social studies. In HHX, HTX you chose some of these lessons and mix it on your own. You can have the lessons on an A-level (means every three years), B-level (two of the years), C-level (one of the years). In STX you must have Danish and history in an A-level, and English in either A or B. The rest you make up by choice, and you can change it during the years.
The levels of the lessons also depend of the subject line you chose. There're the linguistic lines, the social study lines, the math lines, the chemistry lines, the physics lines, the biotech lines, the music lines and sport lines. The EP/health lessons are either on a C or B-level, but no matter what you chose you have it every year. Here the levels just tell if you're very good at sport and you just really love it, or if you're not that interested in it. If you're on a B-level you'll have quite more EP-lessons than the C-level.
You go to exams in 1.g, 2.g and 3.g.
The grades are following (starting with the worst, ending with the best): -3: means you performed unacceptably. 00: dumped. 02: acceptable, but not good. 4: low average but okay. 7: high average and good. 10: over the average, very good job. 12: much over the average, excellent job.


== Finland ==
In Finland, ninth grade is the last year of compulsory schooling. The students are usually 15 – 16 years old. Afterwards they can choose to go through tenth grade but it is not required. The meaning of tenth grade is to give an opportunity to improve grades.


== France ==
In France, the equivalent grade is the troisième or "3ème" and it is the final school year before high school.
Students prepare to take the "Diplôme National du Brevet" (DNB) examination - it's the first diploma given to French students, and attests of basic levels in major high school disciplines (French, Mathematics, History and Geography and Arts). This diploma is not necessary to proceed on to high school.


== Germany ==
In Germany, the equivalent grade is 9. Klasse.


== Hong Kong ==
In Hong Kong, 9th grade is called Form 3. Students finishing 9th grade are needed to select their electives for them to study in Grade 10, Grade 11 and Grade 12


== India ==
In India, the ninth grade is the second last year of the secondary school. Students undergo and prepare for final secondary school examinations called the SSC Exam for two years i.e. grade 9 and 10 before getting into higher secondary i.e. grade 11 and 12 called the HSSC Exam.


== Ireland ==
In Ireland, it is the Third Year or Tríú Bhliain of Secondary School (for 14- and 15-year-olds) this is known as 3rd year. This year is the year students take the Junior Certificate or Teastas Sóisearach.


== Italy ==
In Italy, it is the first year of the upper secondary school (which translates into scuola secondaria di secondo grado, informally called scuola superiore). In Italy ninth grade is called prima superiore.


== Kuwait ==
In Kuwait, ninth grade is the last year of middle school.


== Malaysia ==
In Malaysia, the equivalent of 9th grade is Form 3 (Tingkatan 3). Students are 15 years old, and it is their third year of secondary school. In Form 3, all students are required to sit for a mandatory exam throughout all government schools called PT3 (Pentaksiran Tingkatan 3, or Form 3 Assessment). Upon receiving their results, students will be allowed to choose a stream (the subjects of their focus for the next year) of their choice, depending on their results, which will then allow them to proceed to Form 4 in the following year.


== Mexico ==
In Mexico, ninth grade is the last year of middle school. The students are aged 14–15.


== New Zealand ==
In New Zealand, Year 10 (formerly Form 4) is the equivalent of ninth grade, with students aged 14 or 15 during the year. It is the second year of secondary school and the tenth year of compulsory education. Students in Year 10 typically study English, mathematics, science, social science, and health and physical education, with students electing subjects out of the arts, technology, and learning language.


== Norway ==
In Norway, 9th grade is the middle grade of middle school, "ungdomskolen". Students are 14-15 years old.


== Pakistan ==
In Pakistan, 9th grade have a great importance as it is the base of higher education. At this level students are allowed to choose the subjects of their will. These subjects are:-
Biology
Computer
Arts
The compulsory subjects are:-
Math
Chemistry
Physics
Urdu
English Language
Islamiyat
Pakistan studies
Home Economics
Agriculture
Physical Education
Marks of grade 9 are half of collective 9th and 10th marks.


== Philippines ==
In the Philippines, Grade 9 is the third year of Junior High School. Topics mainly discussed are the following subjects like, for the major subjects are Geometry (Math in Grade 9), Chemistry (Science in Grade 9), Filipino subject with Noli Me Tangere, Anglo-American Literature (English) and Philippine Economical Study (Political Studies in Grade 9). Values Education, MAPEH (Music, Arts, Physical Education and Health), Computer and TLE (Technology and Livelihood Education) are some of the minor subjects. Students are usually 14–15 years old.


== Portugal ==
In Portugal, the ninth grade (nono ano, 9º ano) is the last year of the three-year 3º Ciclo do Ensino Básico that also includes the seventh grade and the eighth grade. It is followed by the tenth grade, the first year of the three-year Ensino Secundário. At the end of the ninth grade, students must take national final exams (Provas finais nacionais).


== Singapore ==
In Singapore, 9th grade is called Secondary 3, and it is the third year of one's secondary education. Students are usually 15 years old.


== Spain ==
Ninth Grade in Spanish is called 3º de ESO (tercero de Educación Secundaria Obligatoria), as it is the third year of the compulsory secondary education. Students are usually 14–15 years old. Secondary school in Spain has a four year duration. Students in Spain generally start secondary school at the age of 12, and finish at the age of 16. The school year starts in September and lasts until the next year in June.


== Sweden ==
In Sweden, ninth grade is the last year of högstadiet (Secondary school). The students are usually between 15 and 16 years old. That makes ninth grade an important grade for almost every student.


== United Kingdom ==


=== England and Wales ===
In English and Welsh schools, 9th grade (in terms of age requirements) is equivalent to Year 10 (called Year 11 in Northern Ireland), the fourth year of comprehensive/high/grammar school. Most students in the UK (except for Scotland) start secondary school at the age of 11, and finish at the end of the academic year (September 1 – August 31) in which their 16th birthday falls when they sit GCSE exams. Compulsory education continues beyond 16, when students can choose to remain at school in the "Sixth Form" or attend a sixth form college or further education college to take AS levels and A levels or follow vocational courses or apprenticeships. Students are age 14 to 15 in this grade.


=== Scotland ===
In Scotland, this is third year (or S3) of secondary school. Most children are aged 14-15. In S3 students will pick subjects to study for "National 4/5 exams" in S4, which are the qualifications they will need for college.


== United States ==
In the United States, ninth grade is usually the first year in high school (called "upper secondary school" in other countries). In this system, ninth graders are also often referred to as freshmen. It can also be the last year of junior high school. The typical age for U.S. 9th grade students is 14 to 15 years.
In the math curriculum, ninth graders are usually taught Algebra, but advanced math include Geometry or Algebra II. Most basic students usually take Pre-Algebra in their last year of middle school, advanced students will take Algebra I, and Honors students will take honors pre-algebra. Advanced courses are usually available to ninth graders who are prepared for a more rigorous curriculum, depending on the school district. Some districts across the country allow their 10th graders to take Trigonometry or AP Statistics, or even Calculus if the district provides, but most often, the highest level available to be taken as a 10th grader is Pre-Calculus.
In the English curriculum, most schools still have the same levels of basic courses, advanced courses, and honors courses. The basic level for a 9th grader is often listed as English I (may also be called English 9). This course will often teach the fundamentals of higher-level literature and how to analyze and respond to such literature. The advanced course is often English II (may also be called English 10) depending on the school district and is usually a genre studies type of English class, but it may instead be focused on one type of literature, such as American literature or British Literature. The honors level for 9th grade is usually English I HNR (may also be called Honors English I) and is usually focused on one type of literature (i.e. American Literature, British Literature), but if this was already covered it previous classes, it may be a genre study English course. Although rare, a district or school may allow a student to take AP Literature their 9th grade year.
In the social studies curriculum, there is a variety of different courses that may be offered. Most often, though, the course is either a Geography class, a Government class, a World History class, or a Exploring Civics class.
In the science curriculum, ninth grade students are required, in most areas, to take Earth Science, Science Topics, or Biology. As far as the course level, Integrated Science 1A is usually taken by the basic student.
Most high school students are required to have one carnegie unit of Computer Science, one unit of Physical Education, and one unit of Health Education in order to graduate. These students are usually offered foreign language this year. This is often the first introduction of foreign language to the students.


== See also ==
Educational stage
First grade
Second grade
Third grade
Fourth grade
Fifth grade
Sixth grade
Seventh grade
Eighth grade
Tenth grade
Eleventh grade
Twelfth grade
University