My Hero Academia (Japanese: 僕のヒーローアカデミア, Hepburn: Boku no Hīrō Akademia) is an adventure superhero manga series written and illustrated by Kōhei Horikoshi. It has been serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump since July 2014, and 19 volumes have been collected in tankōbon format. The story follows Izuku Midoriya, a boy born without superpowers in a world where they are the norm, but who still dreams of becoming a superhero himself, and is scouted by the world's greatest hero who shares his powers with Izuku after recognizing his value and enrolls him in a high school for heroes in training.
The manga was adapted into an anime television series animated by Studio Bones. Its first season aired in Japan from April 3 to June 26, 2016, followed by a second season from April 1 to September 30, 2017. A third season began airing April 7, 2018, as well as an animated film titled My Hero Academia: Two Heroes for release in the same year.
The series has been licensed for English-language release by Viz Media, and began serialization in their weekly digital manga anthology Weekly Shonen Jump on February 9, 2015.


== Plot ==

In a world where people with superpowers known as "Quirks" (個性, Kosei) are the norm, Izuku Midoriya has dreams of one day becoming a Hero despite being bullied by his classmates for not having a Quirk. After being the only one to try and save his childhood bully Katsuki Bakugo from a villain, the world's greatest Hero, All Might, bestows upon him his own quirk "One For All". The story follows Izuku's entrance into U.A. High School (雄英高校, Yūei Kōkō), a school that cultivates the next generation of superheroes.


== Media ==


=== Manga ===

My Hero Academia is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Kōhei Horikoshi. It began its serialization in the manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump in July 2014. As of April 4, 2018, the series been collected into eighteen tankōbon volumes. The series is licensed for the English language release in North America by Viz Media, who published the first volume on August 4, 2015. As the series is published in Japan, it is also released simultaneously in English digitally by Viz Media's Weekly Shōnen Jump. As of June 5, 2018, 13 volumes have been released.
A spin-off series, My Hero Academia: Vigilantes, began being published by Weekly Shōnen Jump in 2017. The series is licensed for the English language release in North America by Viz Media, who will publish the first volume on July 3, 2018.


=== Anime ===

On October 29, 2015, the series' official Twitter announced that My Hero Academia would receive an anime adaptation produced by Studio Bones.
With the anime announced, Toho registered the domain name "heroaca.com" as the anime's website. The anime is directed by Kenji Nagasaki, written by Yōsuke Kuroda, and feature character designs by Yoshikiko Umakoshi and music composed by Yuki Hayashi. The anime premiered on MBS and other Japan News Network stations in the Nichigo time slot at 5 P.M. on Sundays in Japan. The opening theme is "The Day", performed by Porno Graffitti and the ending theme is "Heroes", performed by Brian the Sun. In March 2016, Funimation Entertainment announced they had licensed the series for streaming services, home and broadcast release, as well as obtaining the merchandise rights. Universal Pictures UK announced that they licensed the first season in the United Kingdom, however, Sony Pictures Home Entertainment licensed subsequent seasons after the acquisition of Funimation by Sony Pictures Television. In Australia and New Zealand, the series is licensed by Universal Sony Pictures Home Entertainment.
A second season was announced in the Weekly Shōnen Jump magazine's 30th issue of 2016. It premiered on April 1, 2017 on NTV and YTV, and ended on September 30, 2017, with the staff and cast from the first season returning to reprise their roles. The first opening theme is "Peace Sign" performed by Kenshi Yonezu and the first ending theme is "Dakara, Hitori ja nai" (だから、ひとりじゃない, lit. Therefore, I am not Alone), performed by Little Glee Monster. The second opening theme is "Sora ni Utaeba" (空に歌えば, lit. If I Sing to the Sky) performed by amazarashi and the ending theme is "Datte Atashi no Hero" (だってアタシのヒーロー, lit. Still My Hero) by LiSA.
A third season was announced in the 44th issue of Weekly Shōnen Jump magazine of 2017. The simuldub premiered on April 7, 2018. The opening theme is "Odd Future" by Uverworld, while the ending theme is "Update" by Miwa.
On April 19, 2018, Funimation announced that the series would air on Cartoon Network's Toonami starting on May 5.


=== Film ===

An anime film was announced in December 2017 and will feature an original story set after the manga's "Final Exam" arc. Titled My Hero Academia: Two Heroes (僕のヒーローアカデミア THE MOVIE ～2人の英雄 (ヒーロー)～, Boku no Hīrō Akademia THE MOVIE: Futari no Hīrō), the film will have its world premiere at Anime Expo on July 5, 2018, and the Japanese theatrical release is scheduled for August 3, 2018, with the staff and cast from the anime series returning to reprise their roles. Funimation have announced that they would release the film theatrically in the United States and Canada in Q3 2018.


=== Video games ===
A video game based on the anime, My Hero Academia: Battle for All, was announced in November 2015. The game was developed by Dimps and published by Bandai Namco Entertainment for the Nintendo 3DS handheld game console, where it released in Japan on May 19, 2016.
A second video game, titled My Hero One's Justice, will be released for PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch, Xbox One and Microsoft Windows in August 23, 2018.


== Reception ==
The manga was nominated for the 8th Manga Taishō in 2015. Before the anime adaptation's premiere, manga author Masashi Kishimoto praised Kōhei Horikoshi's work, believing it would be a success overseas; Horikoshi, meanwhile, has cited Kishimoto's Naruto series as a primary source of inspiration.
Volume 1 reached the 7th place on the weekly Oricon manga chart with 71,575 copies sold. It sold out almost immediately on its first printing. Volume 2 reached the 6th place, with 167,531 copies and, by January 18, 2015, had sold 205,179 copies. As of March 2017, there were over 10 million copies of My Hero Academia in circulation. As of February 2018, the manga had over 13 million copies in print.
The story has been noted to take inspiration from elements in superhero comics, such as the aesthetics of its characters.
Alex Osborn of IGN gave the anime series positive marks, saying "The first season of My Hero Academia delivers thirteen episodes of fantastic action, elevated by a heartfelt story that's wrapped around a core cast of memorable and relatable characters." Osborn went on to state that the villains were underdeveloped.
The manga won the Sugoi Japan Award in 2017. It also won the "Japan Expo Awards" in the same year.
Due to the popularity of the series, characters of My Hero Academia were used to promote the Marvel Studios film Avengers: Infinity War.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official anime website (in Japanese)
Official page at Weekly Shōnen Jump (in Japanese)
My Hero Academia (manga) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia