BCA Study Abroad (founded as Brethren College Abroad) began in 1962 as a secular, non-profit provider of academic, language and cultural immersion studies for undergraduates from a consortium of colleges and universities (see below). Faithful to the values of peace and social justice that inspired its founding, BCA Study Abroad facilitates opportunities for growth in intercultural understanding and global awareness through educational programs that foster scholarship, community engagement and guided reflective learning. Currently headquartered at Elizabethtown College in Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania, BCA's tagline is: Bridge the world, Connect for peace, Act for justice.


== Origins ==
BCA was founded in 1962 by Morley J. Mays as a consortium of six charter member colleges affiliated with the Church of the Brethren:
Bridgewater College
Elizabethtown College
Juniata College
McPherson College
Manchester College
University of La Verne
BCA offered its first exchange program with Philipps-Universität in Marburg, Germany, the oldest extant Protestant university in the world. Today approximately 75 U.S. colleges and universities send students abroad through BCA.


== Participating international schools ==
BCA offers 15 semester or year-long programs in 13 international locations, including:
Vesalius College in Brussels, Belgium
Dalian University in Dalian, China
Universidad San Francisco de Quito in Quito, Ecuador
University of Gloucestershire in Cheltenham, England
University of Roehampton in London, England
Universeté de Strasbourg in Strasbourg, France
Philipps-Universität in Marburg, Germany.
Madras Christian College in Chennai, India
Maynooth University in Maynooth, Ireland
University of Otago in Dunedin, New Zealand
Universitat de Barcelona in Barcelona, Spain
Universitas Castellae in Valladoid, Spain
University of the West Indies St. Augustine in St. Augustine, Trinidad & Tobago
In addition to their semester programs, BCA offers 6 summer programs including:
Internationales Kulturinstitut (IKI) in Vienna, Austria
University of Roehampton in London, England
Maynooth University in Maynooth, Ireland
Dolomit in Trentino region of Italy
Dar Loughat Cross-Cultural Language Center in Tetouan, Morocco
Universitas Castellae in Valladoid, Spain


== Program ==
For more than 50 years, BCA Study Abroad has been committed to helping students understand the complexities of the contemporary world by providing quality academic programs and cross-cultural learning in locations around the globe. From its start, BCA focused its mission on bridging academic learning and connecting it directly to experiences with local people and the issues that impact their lives. As a result, BCA students actively participate in their own learning and develop critical skills that empower them to be engaged and informed global citizens..


== References ==


== External links ==
BCA Official Site