Open-source appropriate technology (OSAT) is appropriate technology designed in the same fashion as free and open-source software. OSAT refers to, on the one hand, technology designed with special consideration to the environmental, ethical, cultural, social, political, and economic aspects of the community it is intended for. On the other hand, OSAT is developed in the open and licensed in such a way as to allow their designs to be used, modified and distributed freely.


== Benefits ==
Open source is a development method for appropriate technology that harnesses the power of distributed peer review and transparency of process. Appropedia is an example of open-source appropriate technology. There anyone can both learn how to make and use AT free of concerns about patents. At the same time anyone can also add to the collective open-source knowledge base by contributing ideas, observations, experimental data, deployment logs, etc. It has been claimed that the potential for open-source-appropriate technology to drive applied sustainability is enormous. The built in continuous peer-review can result in better quality, higher reliability, and more flexibility than conventional design/patenting of technologies. The free nature of the knowledge also obviously provides lower costs, particularly for those technologies that do not benefit to a large degree from scale of manufacture. Finally, OSAT also enables the end to predatory intellectual property lock-in. This is particularly important in the context of technology focused on relieving suffering and saving lives in the developing world.
The "open-source" model can act as a driver of sustainable development. Reasons include:
It enables localization for communities that do not have the resources to tempt commercial developers to provide local versions of their products. It thus minimizes the need to ship materials over long distances and organizes material activities accordingly;
Local manufacturing also makes maintenance easier and also encourages manufacturers to design products to last as long as possible;
It can be free as in "gratis" as well as free as in "libre", an important consideration for developing communities. following the lateral scaling concepts of Jeremy Rifkin. It thus optimizes the sharing of knowledge and design as there are no patent costs to pay for.


== Ethical considerations ==
For solutions, many researchers, companies, and academics do work on products meant to assist sustainable development. Vinay Gupta has suggested that those developers agree to three principles:
I will not permit any human being to be deprived of life-giving technology by the profit motive.
Any works that I patent I will make available to others who are engaged in humanitarian activity for free, except where this would breach other contractual responsibilities.
I will not use patent law to slow the pace of innovation or service delivery to the needy under any circumstances.
The ethics of information sharing in this context has been explored in depth.


== Support in the literature ==
It has been investigated how open sharing of designs, specifications, and technical information can enhance effectiveness, widespread use, and innovation of appropriate technology.
OSAT has been proposed as a new model of enabling innovation for sustainable development.
OSAT has been claimed to assist in development of medical technology particularly for the developing world.
It has been claimed that the sharing of design processes, appropriate tools, and technical information enables more effective and rapid development of appropriate technologies for both industrialized and non-industrialized regions. In addition, it is claimed that this sharing will require the appropriate-technology community to adopt open standards/licenses, document knowledge, and build on previous work.
OSAT can be used to generate renewable energy
OSAT in ICT
OSAT and peer production


== In education ==
At the university level, the use of open-source-appropriate technology classroom projects has been shown to be successful in forging the connection between physics and social benefit: This approach has the potential to use university students' access to resources and testing equipment in furthering the development of appropriate technology. Similarly OSAT has been used as a tool for improving service learning. MIT has completed a study looking at the usefulness of using appropriate technology education and its relation to OSAT.
It has been proposed that the evolution of the open-source 3D printers can enable a new method of development for OSAT


== Open source scientific equipment ==
Open source hardware for science can also be considered OSAT. Hundreds of scientific tools have already been developed and shared. Recently (2014) open source labs have been proposed.


== Evaluation ==
Appropriate technology is designed to promote decentralized, labor-intensive, energy-efficient and environmentally sound businesses. Carroll Pursell says that the movement declined from 1965 to 1985, due to an inability to counter advocates of agribusiness, large private utilities, and multinational construction companies. Recently (2011), several barriers to OSAT deployment have been identified:
AT seen as inferior or "poor person's" technology
Technical transferability and robustness of AT
Insufficient funding
Weak institutional support
The challenges of distance and time in tackling rural poverty.


== See also ==
Applied sustainability
Appropedia
Appropriate technology
Engineering for Change
Open design
Open manufacturing
Sustainable development


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Agroblogger
the P2P Foundation
Project Sunshine
Sustainablog
Open energy monitor